# Caesar Cipher Workshop

## Step 1
As you may recall from previous lessons, in Python, you declare a variable by writing the variable name on the left side of the assignment operator (`=`) and the value to assign on the right side:

```python
variable_name = value
```

Create a variable called `shift` and assign the value `5` to your new variable.

## Step 2
In previous lessons, you learned about different data types you can store in a variable. You just assigned an integer value. Now you need to assign a string, which is a sequence of characters enclosed by either single or double quotes:

```python
string_1 = 'I am a string'
string_2 = "I am also a string"
```

Declare another variable called `alphabet` and assign the string `abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz` to this variable.

## Step 3
In this workshop, you are going to build a Caesar cipher. This is one of the simplest techniques to encrypt text, which consists of substituting each letter of the plain text with the letter found at a fixed number of positions down the alphabet. For example, with a shift of `5`, `a` would be replaced by `f`, `b` by `g` and so on.

To implement this cipher, you'll need to create a new version of your alphabet that starts at the position indicated by the shift. As you learned in a previous lesson, you can extract part of a string using string slicing:

```python
fcc = 'freeCodeCamp'
print(fcc[8:])  # Camp
```

Create a variable named `shifted_alphabet` and use the slicing syntax to assign it the portion of `alphabet` that starts at the index of `shift`. Then, call the built-in `print()` function to print `shifted_alphabet` on the terminal and look at the result.

## Step 4
As you can see from the output, the shifted alphabet starts at the letter `f` because `shift` has the value `5`. But now the first five letters of the alphabet – `a`, `b`, `c`, `d` and `e` – are missing from the shifted alphabet, so you'll need to add them at the end of the shifted alphabet.

The `+` operator is used to combine two or more strings together in a process called concatenation like this:

```python
greeting = 'Hello' + ' ' + 'World'
print(greeting)  # Hello World
```

Modify the existing assignment of the `shifted_alphabet` variable: use the slicing syntax to extract the missing first portion of `alphabet` and concatenate it to `alphabet[shift:]`.

As a reminder, `sentence[start:stop]` returns the characters of `sentence` from position `start` (included) to `stop` (excluded).

## Step 5
Now that you have your entire shifted alphabet, remove the `print(shifted_alphabet)` call.

## Step 6
The `str.maketrans()` method takes two strings of equal length and returns a translation table that maps each character of the first string with the corresponding character of the second string. Each character in the translation table is stored as a Unicode ordinal, a number that uniquely identifies the character.

```python
lower_chars = 'abc'
upper_chars = 'ABC'

table = str.maketrans(lower_chars, upper_chars)
print(table)  # {97: 65, 98: 66, 99: 67}
```

You'll learn more about the type of structure returned by `str.maketrans()` later on in the curriculum. For now, create a translation table that maps the characters in `alphabet` to the characters in `shifted_alphabet` and assign it to a variable named `translation_table`.

## Step 7
Declare a new variable named `text` and assign it the string `hello world`. This will be the message to encrypt.

## Step 8
The `translate()` method takes as argument the translation table generated by `str.maketrans()`. It is called on a string and returns a copy of the original string where the characters have been replaced based on the translation table:

```python
t = str.maketrans('lk', 'br')
sentence = 'The tent gave in to the leaks.'

print(sentence.translate(t))
# Output: The tent gave in to the bears.
```

Call the `translate()` method on `text` passing in the `translation_table` as the argument and assign the result to a variable named `encrypted_text`.

## Step 9
Now print `encrypted_text` to see the output in the terminal.

## Step 10
As you can see from the output, the message has been encrypted. The next step will be making your code reusable in case you wanted to encrypt different messages.

For that, you'll need to create a function. As a reminder, here's how to create a function named `spam` that prints `Spam!` on the terminal:

```python
def spam():
	print('Spam!')
```

Create a function named `caesar`. Put all your existing code within the function body. Pay attention to keep the same indentation level for all of the lines within the function body.

## Step 11
As you learned in a previous lesson, functions can have parameters, which are variables that can be referenced within the function. Here's a `sum` function with two parameters, `num1` and `num2`.

```python
def sum(num1, num2):
	print(num1 + num2)
```

The message to encrypt and the shift are still hardcoded in your function. Give your function two parameters named `text` and `shift`, and delete the declarations of both the `text` and `shift` variables from the `caesar` function body.

## Step 12
Now, test the `caesar` function by calling it with the string `freeCodeCamp` and the number `3` as the arguments. Assign the function call to a variable named `encrypted_text`.

## Step 13
Now your code is reusable. However, the `caesar` function prints a message on the terminal and gives back `None` by default. To prove it, print `encrypted_text` at the end of your code.

## Step 14
In previous lessons, you learned that the `return` statement is used to return a value from a function, so that you can use it elsewhere in your code:

```python
def spam():
	return 'Spam!'
```

Remove the `print(encrypted_text)` call from your function. Then, delete the declaration of the `encrypted_text` variable and return directly `text.translate(translation_table)` from your function.

## Step 15
You might have noticed that, although the message is encrypted, the uppercase characters have been left untouched. This happens because the translation table does not include uppercase letters.

To fix it, you'll need to modify the strings passed to your `str.maketrans()` call using the `upper()` method:

```python
greet = "Hello"
print(greet.upper())  # HELLO
```

Update your `str.maketrans()` call by concatenating to each argument the uppercase version of the argument itself.
